title: Problem 12 - Highly Divisible Triangular Number
date: 10 June 2018
category: euler
tags: primes,proof
slug: euler/12
problem: 12
summary: My solution to problem 12 of Project Euler.

# Problem Statement
The sequence of triangle numbers is generated by adding the natural numbers. So the 7th triangle number would be $1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 = 28$.
The first ten terms would be:
\begin{equation*}
	1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 36, 45, 55,\ldots
\end{equation*}
What is the value of the first triangle number to have over $N$ divisors?

# My Algorithm

If we prime factor a number $n$ as
\begin{equation}
	\prod_{p|n} p_i^{e_i},
\end{equation}
where $p_i$ are the prime factors of $n$ and $e_i$ is the largest exponent such that $p_i^{e_i}$ divides $n$, then we can write the number of factors of $n$ as
\begin{equation}
	\prod_{i,p_i|n} (e_i + 1).
	\label{factor-prod}
\end{equation}
We will also use the fact that the $n$-th triangular number is $\frac{n(n+1)}{2}$.
We could find the number of factors of this number in $O(\sqrt{\frac{n(n+1)}{2}}\log\log\frac{n(n+1)}{2}) = O(\sqrt{n^2}\log\log n) = O(n\log\log n)$ time.
But we can also use the fact that $n$ and $n+1$ are coprime.
Because they share no factors, the number of factors of $n(n+1)$ is the product of the number of factors of $n$ and $n+1$, which we can find in $O(\sqrt{n}\log\log n)$ time.

We also need to account for the factors lost by dividing by 2.
Suppose that the greatest power of 2 that divides $n(n+1)$ is $2^k$.
Then $2^k$ divides exactly one of $n$ and $n+1$, so we need not factor $n(n+1)$.
This factor of $2^k$ contributes a $k+1$ term to the product in \eqref{factor-prod}.
Dividing by $2$ turns this into a $k - 1 + 1 = k$ term.
And so the number of factors decreases by $\frac{k}{k+1}$.
We then iterate over $n$ until a number with more than $N$ divisors is found, then return the corresponding triangular number.

This solution has time complexity $O(\frac{M^2\log\log M}{\log M})$, where $M$ is the index of the smallest triangular number with over $N$ divisors,
We can improve this solution by precomputing a sufficiently large list of primes.
Then the solution has time complexity $O(\sqrt{M} \log \log M + \frac{M\sqrt{M}}{\log M}) = O(\frac{M\sqrt{M}}{\log M})$.
We can further optimize the constant factor in our algorithm by caching the number of prime factors of the last $n+1$ that we tested.