title: Problem 18 - Maximum Path Sum I
date: 11 June 2018
category: euler
tags: proof
slug: euler/18
summary: My solution to problem 18 of Project Euler.
status: draft

# Problem Statement



# My Algorithm

The Hackerank bounds for this problem are $N \le 10^{12}$.
First, we create a dictionary of all the ``special'' number names that cannot be procedurally generated:
\begin{equation*}
	0,\ldots,9, 1\cdot10,\ldots,9\cdot10, 10^2,10^3,10^6,10^9,10^{12}
\end{equation*}

Now to process the number $N$.
We begin by breaking the number into five blocks of three digits each, starting from the ones digit.
These will have, in increasing order, no suffix, the suffix ``thousand,'' ``million,'' ``billion,'' and ``trillion.''
We then find the name of the number corresponding to each of these blocks and add the corresponding suffix.

We maintain an array of strings which we shall join together to make the name.
We will use two tricks.
First, that the integer division of $N$ by $10^k$ removes the last k digits of $N$; and second, that $N$ modulo $10^k$ returns the last $k$ digits of $N$.

Now we define a function that returns the name of a number with at most three digits.
If $N$ is zero, we return an empty string.
If $N$ is in our look-up table, we are done.
If not, we get the first digit, or hundreds digit.
If it is non-zero, we add its name and ``hundred'' to the array.
Then we get the last two digits.
If the corresponding number is in the look-up table, we add it to the array.
If not, we find the tens digit and if it is non-zero, we add the name of the corresponding multiple of ten (from our look-up table) to our array.
Finally, we add the name of the ones digit if it is non-zero.

Then, we join together the three-digit name with suffix for each block of three digits in the number.
This solution has time complexity $O(\log n)$.
Because we process the number in blocks of three, the constant factor is small.