+++
title = "Project Euler 22: Names Scores"
author = ["Gautam Manohar"]
description = "My solution to problem 22 of Project Euler."
date = 2018-06-23
tags = ["brute-force", "string"]
categories = ["euler"]
draft = false
+++

## Problem Statement {#problem-statement}

You are given around five-thousand names. Begin by sorting them by alphabetical
order. Then working out the alphabetical value of each name, multiply this value
by the alphabetical position of the name in the list. For example, suppose `COLIN`
is the 983rd element of a sorted list of names. It is worth \\(3 + 15 + 12 + 9 +
14 = 53\\), so this name has a score of \\(53 \cdot 983 = 49714\\). Give the name
score of the given names.


## My Algorithm {#my-algorithm}

We need two things to solve this problem: a way to get the score of a letter and
a way to get the alphabetical position of a name in the list. We can make a
string `ABCDEFHGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ` containing all the letters of the alphabet.
For each letter in a given name, we find the index of that letter in our string
and add one; this is the score of that letter. We sum the scores and multiply it
by the alphabetical position of a name, which is `i+1`, where `i` is its index
in the sorted list. In Python, sorting a list of strings is done in alphabetical
order. We sort the list of \\(n\\) names in \\(O(n\log n)\\) time, and we find the index
of a name in the list by linearly searching it in \\(O(n)\\) time. The alphabetical
score is computed in \\(O(26) = O(1)\\) time. This solution has time complexity
\\(O(n\log n + Qn)\\).


## Other Solutions {#other-solutions}

Because we sort the list of names, we could use binary search to find the
alphabetical position of a given name. This would improve our time complexity to
\\(O(n\log n + Q\log n)\\). In the HackerRank problem, \\(Q < n\\), but even if \\(Q\\) were
greater than \\(n\\), then some names would be queried more than once. In this case,
instead of recalculating the score, we could cache each score as it is
calculated. And so binary search reduces the complexity of this solution to just
the sorting time, \\(O(n \log n)\\).