+++
title = "Project Euler 24: Lexicographic Permutations"
author = ["Gautam Manohar"]
description = "My solution to problem 24 of Project Euler."
date = 2018-06-13
tags = ["fun"]
categories = ["euler", "math"]
draft = false
+++

## Problem Statement {#problem-statement}

A permutation is an ordered arrangement of objects. For example, \\(\mathrm{dabc}\\)
is a permutation of the word \\(\mathrm{abcd}\\). If the permutations are listed
alphabetically, we call it lexicographic order. The lexicographic permutations
of \\(\mathrm{abc}\\) are:

\begin{equation\*}
\mathrm{abc}, \mathrm{acb}, \mathrm{bac}, \mathrm{bca}, \mathrm{cab}, \mathrm{cba}.
\end{equation\*}

What is the $N$-th lexicographic permutation of the word
\\(\mathrm{abcdefghijklm}\\)?


## My Algorithm {#my-algorithm}

Suppose our word has \\(n\\) letters. Then the first \\((n-1)!\\) lexicographic
permutations begin with \\(a\\), the next \\((n-1)!\\) with \\(b\\), and so on. Consider the
first \\((n-1)!\\) lexicographic permutations. They consist of \\(a\\) followed by a
lexicographic permutation of the word without \\(a\\). Of these, the first \\((n-2)!\\)
begin with \\(b\\). We can write \\(N\\) as a unique sum

\begin{equation}
N = \sum\_{i=0}^{n-1} c\_i \cdot i!,
\end{equation}

where \\(0 \le c\_i \le i + 1\\). This is a kind of "base-factorial" expansion of
\\(N\\). Once we do this, we use the procedure above. Starting from \\(n-1\\) and going
down to \\(0\\), the $N$-th lexicographic permutation has the \\(c\_{n-1}\\)-th letter in
the first position, the \\(c\_{n-2}\\)-th letter of those remaining in the second
position, and so on.

And so our algorithm is as follows. Write \\(N\\) as a sum of factorials. Maintain
a list of the letters in the word, in alphabetical order. For \\(n-1 \ge i \ge 0\\),
delete the $c\_i$-th element from the list and add it to the string representing
the lexicographic permutation. This solution has time complexity \\(O(L)\\), where
\\(L\\) is the length of the given word.