+++
title = "Project Euler 36: Double Base Palindromes"
author = ["Gautam Manohar"]
description = "My solution to problem 36 of Project Euler."
date = 2018-06-24
tags = ["brute-force", "string"]
categories = ["euler"]
draft = false
+++

## Problem Statement {#problem-statement}

The decimal number \\(65 = 1001001001\_2\\) is palindromic in both decimal and
binary. Find the sum of all natural numers less than \\(N\\) which are palindromic
in base 10 and base \\(K\\).


## My Algorithm {#my-algorithm}

We need two things to solve this problem: a way to convert a number from base 10
to base \\(K\\) and a way to generate palindromes. First, let's think about how
numbers are written in base 10. The first thing we process is the rightmost
digit, which represents the number of times the corresponding power of 10 goes
into the number. And so we must start with the highest power of the base, remove
as many multiples of it as possible, and continue. This procedure has
\\(\lfloor\log\_K n\rfloor\\) steps, where \\(n\\) is the decimal number to be converted.
This is because we perform one step for each possible exponent, where the
maximal exponent on \\(K\\) is \\(\lfloor \log\_K n \rfloor\\). To generate palindromes
of length at most \\(n\\), we start with all numbers of length at most
\\(\frac{n}{2}\\).

To generate palindromes of even length at most \\(n\\), we take one
of these numbers \\(p\\) and add on the reverse of \\(p\\). For odd-length palindromes,
we do the same thing, but add one of the digits \\(0,\ldots,9\\) in the middle. And
so there are \\(9\cdot10^{k-1}\\) palindromes with \\(2k\\) digits and \\(9\cdot10^{k}\\)
palindromes with \\(2k + 1\\) digits. Given \\(N\\), we generate all palindromes with no
more digits than \\(N\\) and keep the ones less than \\(N\\). We test whether each of
these are palindromic in base \\(K\\). We calculate less than
\\(10^{\frac{\lfloor\log\_K n\rfloor}{2}} \le \sqrt{n}\\) palindromes and perform
\\(\lfloor\log\_K n\rfloor \le \log\_K n\\) operations on each of them. Our solution
has time complexity \\(O(\sqrt{n}\log n)\\).