+++
title = "Project Euler 37: Truncatable Primes"
author = ["Gautam Manohar"]
description = "My solution to problem 37 of Project Euler."
date = 2018-06-24
tags = ["primes", "brute-force"]
categories = ["euler"]
draft = false
+++

## Problem Statement {#problem-statement}

The number 3797 has an interesting property. Being prime itself, it is possible
to continuously remove digits from left to right, and remain prime at each
stage: 3797, 797, 97, 7. Similarly, we can remove digits from right to left:
3797, 379, 37, 3. Find the sum of primes that are truncatable from left to right
and right to left less than \\(N\\).


## My Algorithm {#my-algorithm}

A prime is greater than all of its truncations. This means that we can use a
modified Sieve of Eratosthenes. Whenever a prime is encountered, we can check if
all its truncations are also prime; we will already have computed whether each
truncation is prime. When a number has not been marked in the sieve, we mark all
of its multiples, like normal. To right-truncate, we can keep performing integer
division by 10. To left-truncate, we first find the largest power of 10 that
divides the prime. Then, we take the prime modulo this power of 10, and
decrement the power of 10 by one, and repeat. We stop either truncation process
when the value returned is not prime. If at the end of both processes, the
remaining value is 0, it means both truncations were completed and the prime is
fully truncatable. In this case, we add the prime to a running count. This
algorithm has time complexity \\(O(n\log\log n)\\).