+++
title = "Project Euler 46: Goldbach's Other Conjecture"
author = ["Gautam Manohar"]
description = "My solution to problem 46 of Project Euler."
date = 2018-06-24
tags = ["primes"]
categories = ["euler"]
draft = false
+++

## Problem Statement {#problem-statement}

It was proposed by Christian Goldbach that every odd composite number can be
written as the sum of a prime and twice a square. It turns out that the
conjecture was false. How many ways can a given \\(N\\) be represented as the sum of
a prime and twice a square?


## My Algorithm {#my-algorithm}

Suppose an odd composite number \\(n\\) and a prime \\(p\\) provide a match. Then \\(n =
p + 2k^2\\) for some positive integer \\(k\\). And so

\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
n - p &= 2k^2 \\\\\\
k &= \sqrt{\frac{n-p}{2}}.
\end{split}
\label{cand}
\end{equation}

The numbers \\(n,p\\) give a valid match if and only if \eqref{cand} is a positive
integer. We generate a list of primes up to \\(N\_{\text{max}}\\). Then, we test
every prime \\(p < N\\) to see if \eqref{cand} is a positive integer; if so, we have
found a valid way of representing \\(N\\). This solution has time complexity
\\(O(N\log\log N + \frac{TN}{\log N})\\), where \\(T\\) is the number of queries.


### Project Euler {#project-euler}

To solve the Project Euler problem, we write a `while` loop using the function
`ways`. We increment our index \\(i\\), which is initialized at 3, until \\(i\\) is
composite. Then, if `ways(i) == 0`, we break the loop; we have found the smallest
number that cannot be represented as conjectured. Otherwise, we increment \\(i\\) by
2, to the next odd number.